Title: C^3PO: Evaluating Cross-Modal Composition and Counterfactual Performance in Omnimodal Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05381v1

Published Time: Fri, 07 Aug 2026 00:17:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
## C3PO: Evaluating Cross-Modal Composition and Counterfactual Performance in Omnimodal Models 

Swapnanil Mukherjee 1, Agyeya Negi 2, Tanuja Ganu 1, Ponnurangam Kumaraguru 2

> 1

Microsoft Research India, 2IIIT Hyderabad, India  

> Correspondence: swapnanil.mukherjee12@gmail.com

Abstract 

Current Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) can process diverse sensory inputs, yet their reasoning remains heavily biased to-ward a dominant modality, resulting in brittle cross-modal reasoning. We introduce C 3PO, a benchmark of 3,404 samples spanning video, audio, image, and text, evaluating two abili-ties: information composition (fusing dispersed evidence) and counterfactual conflict (resolv-ing deliberate contradictions). C 3PO’s paired IC/CC structure and four-tier design enable tar-geted diagnosis of when and why cross-modal reasoning fails. Built through a fully auto-matic pipeline using 25 logically grounded tem-plates, C ³PO reveals that while humans achieve 88.64% accuracy, the best model (Gemini-3.1-Pro) reaches only 73.17%, with open-source models collapsing under conflict. Through at-tention probes, we find 86–95% of failures stem from modality dominance: models commit to one modality while ignoring contradictory ev-idence, concentrating 87–95% of attention on text. Mid-layer attention entropy predicts cor-rectness—sustained exploration succeeds, pre-mature collapse fails. The 56-point accuracy gap between equally complex templates reveals that performance depends on modalities’ struc-tural roles in conflict resolution, not combina-tions. These findings show multimodal percep-tion does not guarantee robust reasoning; ar-chitectures must enable sustained cross-modal attention to avoid premature commitment. 

1 Introduction 

AI models have experienced a rapid evolution, transitioning rapidly from unimodal architectures to powerful Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) capable of processing textual, visual, and auditory data simultaneously. As these ar-chitectures advanced to integrate diverse sensory streams, the paradigms for evaluating them evolved concurrently. Early assessments relied on simple tasks like captioning or question-answering, but the 

Figure 1: Template-wise breakdown of performance for leading MLLMs on the C3PO dataset. 

field has progressively shifted towards complex and multi-disciplinary audio-visual reasoning tasks (Li et al., 2025a; Jiang et al., 2025). However, despite the impressive improvement in the multimodal ca-pabilities of such models, they are still plagued by “modality bias”. Modality bias occurs when a model disproportionately relies on or ‘prefers’ a single dominant modality (most frequently the pre-trained language prior), while underutilizing, ignoring, or misinterpreting accompanying inputs from other modalities (Zheng et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025; Cai et al., 2025). This problem stems from the architectural and training choices underlying these models. The bias largely arises from dataset imbalances, where language data dominates pre-training while vi-sual and auditory data remain comparatively lim-ited, producing skewed learning dynamics (Leng et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025; Cai et al., 2025; Park et al., 2025). Architectural asymmetry fur-arXiv:2608.05381v1 [cs.AI] 5 Aug 2026 ther exacerbates this issue: modern MLLMs use large pre-trained language encoders as the back-bone, while image and audio encoders are incorpo-rated through fine-tuning or lightweight modality-specific adapters (Microsoft et al., 2025; Fu et al., 2025c). Because these modules are substantially smaller than the language model, the text modality often dominates at the expense of less mature visual and acoustic components (Team et al., 2025). Cur-rent training objectives also fail to enforce balanced cross-modal alignment, encouraging reliance on linguistic shortcuts and priors (Zheng et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025). Prior work further shows that multimodal training itself often converges toward dependence on a dominant modality, even under more balanced settings (Wang et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2022). The lack of cross-modal competence becomes evident when modalities present conflicting, or asynchronous information, requiring reasoning about information spread across multiple modal-ities (Leng et al., 2025). Existing evaluation pro-tocols largely rely on manually curated datasets that are expensive to scale, limited in data and task diversity, and biased toward simple perception or multiple-choice questions solvable through uni-modal priors. Although recent benchmarks attempt to address these limitations, they retain key short-comings. The majority of current datasets (such as WorldSense(Hong et al., 2025), MAVERIX (Xie et al., 2026), OmniVideoBench (Li et al., 2025a) etc.) restrict themselves to tri-modal (e.g., Video+Audio+Text) or fewer inputs. FysicsWorld (Jiang et al., 2025) includes all four modalities but requires intensive human-LLM collaborative re-view, limiting scalability. Moreover, benchmarks like MMA-Bench (Chen et al., 2025) and DAVE (Radevski et al., 2025) evaluate simple modality contradictions, but lack the task diversity needed to assess both counterfactual reasoning and informa-tion composition across all four input modalities in real-world settings. Thus, our contributions in this paper are: 1. We introduce a new benchmark dataset, 

C3PO , composed of co-located video, audio, image, and text modalities to assess the capa-bilities of MLLMs along two broad cognitive axes, including a novel Counterfactual Con-flict category. 2. We propose a fully automatic and scalable generation framework consisting of 25 granu-   

> Figure 2: Hierarchical taxonomy of our C 3PO bench-mark dataset. The two primary task categories Infor-mation Composition and Counterfactual Reasoning
> are subdivided into Tiers (1-4) by modality combina-tions. Each Tier is subdivided into 25 task templates.

lar task templates corresponding to real-world abilities, addressing the scalability limits of manual annotation. 3. We conduct a fine-grained analysis of the var-ious failure modes of leading MLLMs across diverse tasks involving combinations of dif-ferent modalities, demonstrating the effective-ness of our benchmark in exposing the modal-ity biases that affect even the strongest omni-modal models. 

2 Related Work 

Modality Bias and Interference in MLLMs .Existing work has increasingly identified modal-ity bias as a severe vulnerability in multimodal learning. Leng et al. (2025) introduced the Curse of Multi-Modalities (CMM) benchmark, showing that MLLMs suffer hallucinations driven by over-reliance on unimodal priors and spurious inter-modality correlations learned during pretraining. Cai et al. (2025) used causal perturbation-based di-agnostics to expose modality interference, demon-strating that non-essential modalities heavily dis-tort model decisions. Hua et al. (2025) studied Vision-Language models under conflicting inputs finding that models often exhibit “blind faith” in text. In the audio domain, Wang et al. (2025) pro-posed MCR-BENCH for Audio-Language models and showed a widespread text bias, where models frequently disregard clear auditory evidence under contradiction. 

Omnimodal Benchmarks . Early benchmarks focused on static visual understanding and aca-demic reasoning, including MME (Fu et al., 2025a) and MMMU (Yue et al., 2024). MMT-Bench (Ying et al., 2024) expanded this with 31,325 cu-rated multiple-choice questions across 162 sub-tasks spanning multitask understanding, spatial lo-calization, and expert knowledge. Video-MME (Fu et al., 2025b) evaluated temporal and long-form video understanding using subtitles and au-dio tracks across 13 task categories including per-ception, causal reasoning, and sentiment analy-sis. WorldSense (Hong et al., 2025) focused on omni-modal video understanding through inte-grated audio-visual inputs in real-world scenarios. OmniBench (Li et al., 2025b) evaluated concurrent reasoning across visual, acoustic, and textual in-puts, showing that open-source models struggle in tri-modal settings. More recent benchmarks study adversarial or conflicting conditions. DAVE (Rade-vski et al., 2025) and AURA (Galougah et al., 2025) examined audio-visual synchronization and cross-modal reasoning, showing that models infer spuri-ous correlations without evidence and struggle with causal reasoning. MAVERIX (Xie et al., 2026) in-troduced 8-way multiple-choice and open-ended questions across six evaluation dimensions, reveal-ing difficulties with long videos and subtle asyn-chronous audio cues. JointAVBench (Chao et al., 2026) studied multi-scene joint reasoning with three audio types, requiring correlation of auditory and visual cues across temporal and spatial con-texts. Wang et al. (2026) introduced XModBench to evaluate cross-modal consistency and demon-strated strong directional imbalance and modality disparity in leading MLLMs. Finally, and SONIC-O1 (Radwan et al., 2026) introduced bidirectional demographic-aware real-world evaluation. 

3 C3PO: A Benchmark Dataset 

C3PO consists of 3404 samples, 2137 unique video clips, 1646 unique images, 3426 unique audio files. Table 1 shows the distribution of samples across tiers and categories.                                       

> Information Composition Counterfactual Conflict Total Tier 1 692 729 1133
> Tier 2 624 795 2295
> Tier 3 47 292 467
> Tier 4 0163 218 Total 1363 1979 3342
> (a) Distribution of samples Video Audio Image Text
> Tier 1 ✗✓∗✓∗✓
> Tier 2 ✓∗✓✗✓
> Tier 3 ✓∗✓✓✓
> Tier 4 ✓∗✓✓✓
> (b) Availability of modalities across tiers
> Table 1: Dataset distribution and modality composition across categories and tiers in C 3PO. ∗indicates the base modality.

3.1 Construction Methodology 3.1.1 Data Sources 

To avoid the severe hallucinations and lack of phys-ical nuance inherent in purely synthetic data, we adopt a hybrid approach grounded in authentic en-vironments. Our automated pipeline selects real-world “base media” (video/image/audio) from pub-lic datasets and uses it as an anchor to synthesize the missing complementary modalities. This al-lows fine-grained control over the overall sample’s mechanics through constrained generation while ensuring realistic and faithful task evaluation. A full list of the data sources can be found the Ap-pendix A. 

3.1.2 Generation Templates 

Generation templates define the relationship be-tween the various modalities, specifying the logical form of the task and the mechanics of solving it. They define a skeleton for instantiating the content from the base media using the logical form. The benchmark is comprised of 25 such templates 1. An example template is provided in Appendix G. In this benchmark, we target two primary cogni-tive tasks: 1. Information Composition : These templates disperse the required information across var-ious modalities, making cross-modal fusion mandatory to solve the sample correctly. For 

> 1The list of all templates and their full descriptions is available in the Appendix Figure 3: Our pipeline for automatic and scalable benchmark construction.

instance, in InstructionalGapDetection , a muted video shows a full action sequence, while the generated audio intentionally nar-rates only the latter half using transitional markers. The model must connect the au-dio’s starting point to the video sequence to identify the unmentioned initial steps. 2. Counterfactual Conflict : These templates introduce cross-modal contradictions, and the model has to ignore and resolve the conflicting information. For example in CausalMisattribution , a video shows an event triggered by a clearly visible mechanism, while the audio confidently (mis)attributes it to some other cause not present in the video. To answer correctly, the deceptive auditory claim must be ignored to trust the verifiable visual evidence. These templates are categorized into four tiers of increasing cognitive complexity based on their specific modality combinations. Table 1 details the sample distribution and modality composition across these tiers and categories 2.

3.1.3 Generation Pipeline 

To construct the samples, we employ a multi-stage pipeline consisting of candidate selection, multi-modal generation, and automated filtering. 3 

> 2A detailed breakdown of samples by templates and tiers is available in the Appendix.
> 3gemini-3-pro-preview through the Gemini API. All prompts, models, and implementation details are provided in the Appendix.

Base Media Selection For each generation tem-plate, we select suitable source datasets depend-ing on the base modality. Candidate media files are chosen using dataset annotations and template-specific constraints, followed by lightweight pre-processing. 

Multimodal Generation Given the candidate base media, Gemini-3-Pro generates the query along with detailed descriptions of the complemen-tary modalities to complete the sample as per the template’s logic. The corresponding image and au-dio files are then synthesized using state-of-the-art generative models. 

Self-Audit and Revision Each generated sample undergoes an internal self-audit step during genera-tion. Samples that can be solved through unimodal shortcuts, commonsense priors, query leakage, or ambiguous reasoning must be revised before the model outputs the sample. 

3.1.4 Filtering Process 

As samples are generated using ‘candidate’ base media files which may not necessarily be an ideal fit for the template’s structure, the full sample gen-erated using that base media may be of poor qual-ity. We apply an automated model-based filtering pipeline to ensure consistency, coherence, and mul-timodal dependence in the samples. 

Template Alignment Verifies that all modalities and the query jointly satisfy the logical structure of the template. For Information Composition sam-ples, the answer must require combining informa-tion across modalities; for Counterfactual Conflict Benchmark Modalities IC CC Tasks Source Datasets Samples Generation Pipeline 

Video-MME V + A + T ✓ ✗ 12 1 2,700 Manual OmniBench I + A + T ✓ ✗ 8 3 1,142 Manual CMM V + A + T ✓ ✓ 6 2 ∼1,200 Manual WorldSense V + A + T ✓ ✗ 8 1 3,172 Manual MAVERIX V + A + T ✓ ✗ 7 5 2,556 Manual OmniVideoBench V + A + T ✓ ✗ 13 2 1,000 Manual Daily-Omni V + A + T ✓ ✗ 6 3 1,197 Semi-Auto JointAVBench V + A + T ✓ ✗ 15 1 2,853 Semi-Auto DAVE V + A + T ✓ ✓ 3 2 2,426 Semi-Auto MMA-Bench V + A + T ✗ ✓ - 1 1,316 Semi-Auto AURA V + A + T ✓ ✗ 6 2 1,600+ Auto FysicsWorld V + A + I + T ✓ ✗ 16 40+ 3,268 Semi-Auto XModBench V, I + A + T ✓ ✗ 17 10 61,320 Semi-Auto 

C3PO (Ours) V + A + I + T ✓ ✓ 25 8 3342 Auto       

> Table 2: Comparison of C 3PO with existing multimodal and omni-modal benchmarks. Modality :Video, Audio,
> Image, Text. IC : Information Compostion, tests integration of dispersed information across modalities. CC :Counterfactual Conflict, tests counterfactual reasoning, modality interference, or deliberate misalignment.

samples, the answer must remain uniquely identifi-able within a plausible conflict. 

Media Verification Ensures that media (base and generated) accurately match their textual de-scriptions, to mitigate any hallucinations by the generation pipeline. 

Query Leakage Detection Checks whether the query leaks information about any modality or ex-poses template logic that simplifies solving. 

Naturalness and Realism : Evaluates whether the complete multimodal sample is coherent, real-istic, and plausible in real-world settings. 

3.2 Evaluation Protocol 

The ground truth answer for each sample is a free-form string. We opted out of the multiple-choice format as it is prone to guess inflation, elimination-answering, and positional biases, ul-timately overstating model performance (Li et al., 2025a; Molfese et al., 2025). Models are given all the input modalities along with the question and a standardized evaluation prompt 4. The responses are expected to be as specific as possible (to avoid any ambiguity during evaluation) and within a few words. To accurately and scalably grade these di-verse generative outputs, first, a normalized string exact match is performed between the ground truths and predictions after simple preprocessing. If this match fails, we use Qwen3-Omni as an LLM-judge 

> 4Prompt available in the Apppendix.

to check whether the ground truth answer and pre-dicted answer are semantically equivalent. Se-mantic equivalence means whether the judge can uniquely pick out the same entity/concept as the ground truth from the predicted answer in the con-text of the entire sample. The judge returns “Yes” or “No” and accuracy is #Yes  

> #Total Samples

.

3.3 Results and Discussion 

We evaluate a diverse cohort of open-source and proprietary omnimodal models on C3PO (Table 3). For open-source models we report accuracy aver-aged over three independent inference runs; API limits restrict closed-source models to a single run. Gemini-3.1-Pro leads at 73 .17% , while open mod-els fare substantially worse, with Qwen3-Omni, the largest, scoring 43 .98% . The performance of smaller open source models is close to that of random-guessing in a four-way MCQ format. All models perform much worse than the human base-line. Performance is highly template-dependent. Gemini-3.1-Pro maintains broad competence across templates except CausalMisattribution and ContainerContentDispute (Fig. 1), while open-source models collapse on templates requiring causal or temporal reasoning. The performance spread within categories is dramatic: the hardest template (CausalMisattribution, 33% cohort-mean accuracy) and the easiest (DisclaimedEvidence, 92%) are both Counterfactual Conflict tasks with Table 3: Performance (accuracy) of various SOTA open-source and proprietary models on the C 3PO dataset.                                                                                                                                          

> Model Information Composition Counterfactual Conflict Overall (%) Tier 1 Tier 2 Tier 3 Tier 1 Tier 2 Tier 3 Tier 4 Qwen2.5-Omni-3B 27.87 26.27 018.11 8.63 58.22 2.45 21.53 InstructOmni-4B 20.54 14.26 10.64 17.42 3.97 56.16 0.00 16.41 Gemma-3n-E4B 18.47 17.95 6.38 20.03 16.80 26.03 19.63 18.83 Gemma-4-E4B 17.68 26.28 6.38 28.81 14.47 61.99 29.45 25.18 MiniCPM-Omni-7B 30.89 27.40 4.26 22.50 11.67 54.11 19.02 24.55 VITA-1.5 26.11 20.83 027.71 17.85 44.18 15.95 24.07 PandaGPT-7B 2.55 12.66 2.13 12.07 12.49 6.85 19.63 10.27 Qwen2.5-Omni-7B 35.35 29.01 4.26 30.32 12.02 66.10 4.29 27.81 InstructOmni-8B 32.32 20.99 10.64 24.83 5.02 64.73 1.23 22.57 Qwen-3-Omni-Instruct 62.62 53.23 18.93 41.98 36.74 77.76 15.64 43.98 gemini-3.1-pro-preview 73.09 74.04 51.06 74.90 64.99 85.62 89.57 73.17
> gemini-3-flash-preview 74.36 77.08 46.81 71.19 61.26 85.62 95.71 72.46 gemini-2.5-pro 73.25 72.76 42.55 66.67 65.34 81.15 93.87 70.99 gemini-2.5-flash 67.68 62.98 31.91 59.67 51.69 82.53 85.28 62.60 gemini-2.5-flash-lite 35.03 25.16 8.51 16.74 11.32 50.00 14.72 23.05 Human –––––––88.64

contradictory audio, yet differ by 56%. This re-veals that task category alone does not determine difficulty. We analyze the relationship between template structure, task category, and what they reveal about how models resolve cross-modal con-flict in Section 4.3. 

3.3.1 Composition vs. Conflict, and the Tier Effect 

Separating performance along C 3PO’s two cogni-tive axes reveals two patterns that prior multimodal benchmarks do expose at this granularity. Firstly, all evaluated models perform better on Information Composition (IC) than on Counterfactual Conflict (CC) when the conflict is at low tier, but the gap closes and frequently inverts at higher tiers (Ta-ble 3). On IC, accuracy degrades monotonically with tier: each added modality contributes a piece of the answer that the model must combine, and the fusion burden grows. On CC, accuracy is non-monotonic in nearly all models: Tier-3 accuracy exceeds Tier-2 accuracy by a substantial margin be-fore collapsing at Tier 4 again. We trace this non-monotonicity to template structure in Section 4.3. Secondly, when models fail, they tend to fail by trusting one modality and ignoring the other rather than by partially synthesising both. We quantify this cohort-wide in Section 4.2. 

4 A Mechanistic Analysis of Performance 

C3PO’s paired Information Composition (IC) and Counterfactual Conflict (CC) structure enables targeted probing of how models respond to con-flict versus complementary information. Inspired by Selvakumar et al. (2026) We apply three lightweight interpretability probes (E1, E2, E3) to analyse: (1) whether models internally detect cross-modal conflict, and (2) how attention redistributes as modalities accumulate. E1 is an attention probe measuring attention allocation across modalities during generation. E2 is a logit-lens probe testing whether modality information is internally recov-erable before decoding; and E3, a caption-fidelity probe evaluating how faithfully models can recon-struct modality content. Together, E1 and E2 dis-tinguish perception failures (modality information never enters the latent stream) from rendering fail-ures (information reaches the latent stream but not the output). Full probe definitions, protocols, and cohort details are provided in Appendix F. 

4.1 Cross-Modal Conflict Detection: Attention as a Confusion Signal 

We hypothesize that if models internally de-tect cross-modal conflict, this should manifest as higher entropy in their attention distribu-tion: greater uncertainty when modalities con-tradict than when they complement. To test this, we compute the Shannon entropy ( Hℓ =− P 

> i∈{ text ,audio ,image }

pi log 2 pi) of the attention distribution across the tokens for text, audio, and image for each sample, averaging this across the middle layers to compute a scalar mid-layer entropy 

(depth ranges are provided in the Appendix). Here, we exclude videos due to computational memory constraints. Qwen2.5-Omni-7B Gemma-3n Phi-4-MM 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 

> Hmid  (correct  incorrect, bits)
> n.s.
> Mid-layer entropy gap by judge correctness, with 95\% CI
> CC IC

Figure 4: Mid-layer between-modality Shannon entropy: difference between judge-correct and judge-incorrect samples. Five of six model-category pairs show signif-icant positive differences (bootstrap 95% CIs); higher entropy correlates with correct answers. 

Samples marked correct by the LLM judge con-sistently hold higher mid-layer entropy than in-correct samples (Figure 4). Across three mod-els and the two task categories, five of six pairs show a statistically significant positive (the boot-strap 95% confidence intervals for these five pairs strictly exclude zero) positive entropy gap be-tween correct and incorrect predictions ( ∆H =

H correct mid − H incorrect mid ). When pooled using within-model z-normalization, the judge-correctness gap remains robustly positive under both CC ( +0 .43 

standard deviations) and IC ( +0 .21 standard devi-ations) tasks.. While the direction of the effect is consistent across the cohort, the relative strength of the ef-fect under CC versus IC varies by model (see Ap-pendix for detailed bit gaps). The universal take-away across the cohort is that premature attention concentration in the middle layers is a precursor to failure, regardless of whether the task is conflict-driven or composition-driven. The further claim that conflict resolution specifically requires sus-tained mid-layer breadth is strongly supported by Qwen2.5-Omni-7B, but more probed models are needed to confirm it as a cohort universal. 

4.2 Attention Budget Under Modality Pressure 

C3PO’s tier structure allows us to measure how models redistribute attention as modalities accu-mulate. Four models support full routing analysis via E1; five models contribute to observations from E3. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0    

> Attention mass per modality (cohort mean)
> Gemma-3n Phi-4-MM Qwen2.5-Omni-7B Qwen2.5-Omni-3B
> text audio image residual (chat-template tokens)

Figure 5: Mean attention budget per modality. Two dominant profiles emerge: audio-bypass models (Qwen-3B/7B, Phi-4) allocate 90–95% to text, while fusion-attentive models (Gemma-3n) allocate approximately twice as much to non-text modalities. 

Models partition into two qualitatively distinct profiles (Figure 5): 1. Audio-bypass (Qwen-3B, Qwen-7B, Phi-4): Spend almost 87% of the per-layer attention mass to text and chat-template tokens com-bined, leaving only 11-13% for audio and im-age. These models commit to a narrow atten-tion distribution early (relative depth 5 0.11 –

0.31 ) and exhibit audio-fidelity correlation of 

0.95 –0.97 with each other. 2. Fusion-attentive (Gemma-3n): Allocates ap-proximately double the non-text attention (αaudio = 0 .151 , αimage = 0 .115 ), commits later (entropy minimum at 0.54 –0.57 ), and shows the highest latent-image recovery in the cohort. 

Tier-wise dynamics. As the t ier (the number of grounded modalities 6) increases, attention does not monotonically deplete across existing channels. In-stead, it reallocates dynamically toward the modal-ity providing the most semantically dense content, which we observe empirically via the shifting per-modality attention distribution ( α). This realloca-tion is driven by the structural roles modalities play 

> 5

Relative depth refers to a layer’s normalized position within the neural network, expressed as a fraction (from 0.0

to 1.0). 

> 6

We define grounded modality as any task-relevant, non-text input (audio, image, or video). Text serves only as the question prompt with minimal task-specific information. at each tier. Counter-intuitively, audio attention ac-tually rises from T1 to T2 before dropping at T3. At T1, inputs are largely static image-based templates where audio is a thin overlay. At T2, video becomes the base modality; audio transforms into a useful temporal anchor, providing discrete event markers that complement the unfolding video stream. Con-sequently, audio and video act synergistically rather than competitively, boosting audio’s per-token α.However, at T3, the introduction of a static image provides a new, competing visual anchor that drains the attention budget from both audio and video. Because attention is dictated by these struc-tural modality shifts, the composition versus con-flict (CC–IC) attention gap flips sign across tiers(Figure 9). At T1, models route more at-tention to audio under IC than CC ( ∆α ∈

[−0.021 , −0.046] ), but by T3, this trend reverses universally ( ∆α > 0). Ultimately, these trade-offs are driven by which grounded modalities are present and and whether they complement or com-pete. By Tier 4, with all three grounded modal-ities competing for a fixed non-text budget, allo-cations largely reflect the innate modality bias of each model. C_T2_005 D_T2_002 D_T1_004 C_T2_003 C_T1_002 C_T3_002 D_T1_001 C_T4_001 C_T2_002 C_T3_001 D_T2_005 D_T2_001 D_T2_003 C_T2_004 

> 020 40 60 80 100
> Fraction of samples (\%)
> Failure-mode composition per template (averaged across 6 open-source models)
> Correct Audio-only (image ignored) Image-only (audio ignored) Text-prior (both ignored) Incomplete fusion

Figure 6: Per-template failure-mode composition. Dom-inance failures (one modality drove the answer, others were ignored) account for the majority of errors. 

4.3 Template Structure Determines Failure Type 

Across ten models, 86–95% of failures are dominance-driven: the model commits to one modality and ignores others (Figure 6). Incomplete fusion accounts for 5–14% failures 7. Which modal-ity dominates is template-specific, not model-specific: audio-bypass models excel where visual evidence is decisive (DisclaimedEvidence, 61 .6% 

cohort accuracy across the 10 models) but collapse where audio carries unique content (CausalMisat-

> 7

Qualitative examples in Appendix H. 

tribution, 5.5% )8. While they are both Counterfac-tual Confict tasks with contradictory audio, they are the easiest and hardest template across all mod-els, respectively. This 56% gap is explained by two structural properties: 1. Conflict-resolution cue: DisclaimedEvi-dence samples contain an explicit verbal dis-claimer (e.g., “the ruler shown is illustrative only”); identifying it is a text-dominant abil-ity. CausalMisattribution provides no linguis-tic marker: the audio confidently attributes a visible event to a wrong cause, and recov-ery requires deriving causal relations from the video and overriding the audio without any other cues. 2. Arbiter modality: DisclaimedEvidence in-cludes both a video and a static image; when audio and video conflict, the image acts as a tie-breaker. CausalMisattribution has only audio and video, forcing the model to arbitrate between two modalities with no independent reference. This explains the non-monotone tier pattern in Table 3: at T2 (audio + video), CC accuracy is lowest because two-way arbitration is hardest. At T3 (audio + image + video), the arbiter image of-ten pushes CC accuracy above T2. At T4 (all four modalities), ambiguity returns and accuracy de-grades. 

5 Conclusion 

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) frequently exhibit “modality bias,” disproportion-ately relying on textual or auditory priors and over-shadowing visual truths during cross-modal con-flicts. To systematically diagnose this, we introduce 

C3PO , an omnimodal benchmark with co-located video, audio, image, and text modalities and a novel Counterfactual Conflict category missing in ex-isting benchmarks. Thorough evaluations reveal a profound gap between human performance and leading models like Gemini-3.1-Pro, with smaller open models often collapsing under explicit modal-ity conflict. 

6 Limitations 

Gemini currently being the strongest available om-nimodal model was used to generate the samples 

> 8

Per-template failure-mode breakdowns are given in Ap-pendix F.5, Table 12. in our dataset. However, this may give an unfair advantage when evaluating Gemini models on our benchmark. Secondly, the final accuracy entirely depends on the LLM judge’s (Qwen3-Omni) de-cisions. We conduct additional checks (Appendix D) to ensure Qwen3’s decisions are faithful and ac-ceptable and not hindered by its size. Thirdly, the probing experiments (specifically E1) could not be conducted on video samples due to GPU memory constraints, and some open-source models had to be excluded from these experiments due to their architecture which was incompatible with our ex-periments. We intend to expand this analysis to a bigger suite of models which would help solidy the entropy theory. 

References 

Rui Cai, Bangzheng Li, Xiaofei Wen, Muhao Chen, and Zhe Zhao. 2025. Diagnosing and mitigating modality interference in multimodal large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2505.19616. Jianghan Chao, Jianzhang Gao, Wenhui Tan, Yuchong Sun, Ruihua Song, and Liyun Ru. 2026. Join-tavbench: A benchmark for joint audio-visual rea-soning evaluation. In The International Conference on Learning Representations .Tianle Chen, Chaitanya Chakka, Arjun Reddy Akula, Xavier Thomas, and Deepti Ghadiyaram. 2025. Some modalities are more equal than others: De-coding and architecting multimodal integration in mllms. Preprint , arXiv:2511.22826. Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Sanja Fidler, Antonino Furnari, Evangelos Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, and Michael Wray. 2018. Scal-ing egocentric vision: The epic-kitchens dataset. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) .Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Antonino Furnari, Jian Ma, Evangelos Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, and Michael Wray. 2022. Rescal-ing egocentric vision: Collection, pipeline and chal-lenges for epic-kitchens-100. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV) , 130:33–55. Google DeepMind. 2025. Introducing Nano Banana Pro. https://blog.google/innovation-and-ai/ products/nano-banana-pro/ . [Accessed 04-03-2026]. Dave Epstein, Boyuan Chen, and Carl Vondrick. 2020. Oops! predicting unintentional action in video. In 

The IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .Chaoyou Fu, Peixian Chen, Yunhang Shen, Yulei Qin, Mengdan Zhang, Xu Lin, Jinrui Yang, Xiawu Zheng, Ke Li, Xing Sun, Yunsheng Wu, Rongrong Ji, Caifeng Shan, and Ran He. 2025a. MME: A compre-hensive evaluation benchmark for multimodal large language models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Chaoyou Fu, Yuhan Dai, Yongdong Luo, Lei Li, Shuhuai Ren, Renrui Zhang, Zihan Wang, Chenyu Zhou, Yunhang Shen, Mengdan Zhang, Peixian Chen, Yanwei Li, Shaohui Lin, Sirui Zhao, Ke Li, Tong Xu, Xiawu Zheng, Enhong Chen, Caifeng Shan, and 2 others. 2025b. Video-mme: The first-ever comprehensive evaluation benchmark of multi-modal llms in video analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition (CVPR) .Chaoyou Fu, Haojia Lin, Xiong Wang, Yi-Fan Zhang, Yunhang Shen, Xiaoyu Liu, Haoyu Cao, Zuwei Long, Heting Gao, Ke Li, Long Ma, Xiawu Zheng, Rongrong Ji, Xing Sun, Caifeng Shan, and Ran He. 2025c. Vita-1.5: Towards gpt-4o level real-time vision and speech interaction. Preprint ,arXiv:2501.01957. Siminfar Samakoush Galougah, Rishie Raj, Sanjoy Chowdhury, Sayan Nag, and Ramani Duraiswami. 2025. Aura: A fine-grained benchmark and decom-posed metric for audio-visual reasoning. Preprint ,arXiv:2508.07470. Michal Golovanevsky, William Rudman, Michael A. Lepori, Amir Bar, Ritambhara Singh, and Carsten Eickhoff. 2025. Pixels versus priors: Controlling knowledge priors in vision-language models through visual counterfacts. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 24837–24852, Suzhou, China. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, and 1 others. 2022. Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 18995–19012. Jack Hong, Shilin Yan, Jiayin Cai, Xiaolong Jiang, Yao Hu, and Weidi Xie. 2025. Worldsense: Evaluating real-world omnimodal understanding for multimodal llms. Preprint , arXiv:2502.04326. Hangrui Hu, Xinfa Zhu, Ting He, Dake Guo, Bin Zhang, Xiong Wang, Zhifang Guo, Ziyue Jiang, Hongkun Hao, Zishan Guo, Xinyu Zhang, Pei Zhang, Baosong Yang, Jin Xu, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. 2026. Qwen3-tts technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.15621. Tianze Hua, Tian Yun, and Ellie Pavlick. 2025. How do vision-language models process conflicting informa-tion across modalities? Preprint , arXiv:2507.01790. Yu Huang, Junyang Lin, Chang Zhou, Hongxia Yang, and Longbo Huang. 2022. Modality competition: What makes joint training of multi-modal network fail in deep learning? (Provably). In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 9226–9259. PMLR. Yue Jiang, Dingkang Yang, Minghao Han, Jinghang Han, Zizhi Chen, Yizhou Liu, Mingcheng Li, Peng Zhai, and Lihua Zhang. 2025. Fysicsworld: Aunified full-modality benchmark for any-to-any un-derstanding, generation, and reasoning. Preprint ,arXiv:2512.12756. Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin John-son, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, and 1 others. 2017. Visual genome: Connecting language and vision using crowdsourced dense image anno-tations. International journal of computer vision ,123(1):32–73. Sicong Leng, Yun Xing, Zesen Cheng, Yang Zhou, Hang Zhang, Xin Li, Deli Zhao, Shijian Lu, Chunyan Miao, and Lidong Bing. 2025. The curse of multi-modalities: Evaluating hallucinations of large multi-modal models across language, visual, and audio. In 

The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Caorui Li, Yu Chen, Yiyan Ji, Jin Xu, Zhenyu Cui, Shi-hao Li, Yuanxing Zhang, Wentao Wang, Zhenghao Song, Dingling Zhang, Ying He, Haoxiang Liu, Yux-uan Wang, Qiufeng Wang, Jiafu Tang, Zhenhe Wu, Jiehui Luo, Zhiyu Pan, Weihao Xie, and 24 others. 2025a. Omnivideobench: Towards audio-visual un-derstanding evaluation for omni mllms. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.10689. Yizhi Li, Yinghao Ma, Ge Zhang, Ruibin Yuan, Kang Zhu, Hangyu Guo, Yiming Liang, Jiaheng Liu, Zekun Wang, Jian Yang, Siwei Wu, Xingwei Qu, Jin-jie Shi, Xinyue Zhang, Zhenzhu Yang, Yidan Wen, Yanghai Wang, Shihao Li, Zhaoxiang Zhang, and 4 others. 2025b. Omnibench: Towards the future of universal omni-language models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-ing Systems .Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European confer-ence on computer vision , pages 740–755. Springer. Haohe Liu, Yi Yuan, Xubo Liu, Xinhao Mei, Qiuqiang Kong, Qiao Tian, Yuping Wang, Wenwu Wang, Yux-uan Wang, and Mark D Plumbley. 2024. Audi-oldm 2: Learning holistic audio generation with self-supervised pretraining. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , 32:2871– 2883. Microsoft, :, Abdelrahman Abouelenin, Atabak Ash-faq, Adam Atkinson, Hany Awadalla, Nguyen Bach, Jianmin Bao, Alon Benhaim, Martin Cai, Vishrav Chaudhary, Congcong Chen, Dong Chen, Dong-dong Chen, Junkun Chen, Weizhu Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Yi ling Chen, Qi Dai, and 57 others. 2025. Phi-4-mini technical report: Compact yet powerful multimodal language models via mixture-of-loras. 

Preprint , arXiv:2503.01743. Antoine Miech, Dimitri Zhukov, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Makarand Tapaswi, Ivan Laptev, and Josef Sivic. 2019. HowTo100M: Learning a Text-Video Embed-ding by Watching Hundred Million Narrated Video Clips. In ICCV .Francesco Maria Molfese, Luca Moroni, Luca Gioffré, Alessandro Scirè, Simone Conia, and Roberto Nav-igli. 2025. Right answer, wrong score: Uncovering the inconsistencies of LLM evaluation in multiple-choice question answering. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,pages 18477–18494, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jean Park, Kuk Jin Jang, Basam Alasaly, Sriharsha Mopidevi, Andrew Zolensky, Eric Eaton, Insup Lee, and Kevin Johnson. 2025. Assessing modality bias in video question answering benchmarks with mul-timodal large language models. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-Seventh Conference on In-novative Applications of Artificial Intelligence and Fifteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence , AAAI’25/IAAI’25/EAAI’25. AAAI Press. Gorjan Radevski, Teodora Popordanoska, Matthew B. Blaschko, and Tinne Tuytelaars. 2025. Dave: Diag-nostic benchmark for audio visual evaluation. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Ahmed Y. Radwan, Christos Emmanouilidis, Hina Tabassum, Deval Pandya, and Shaina Raza. 2026. Sonic-o1: A real-world benchmark for evaluating multimodal large language models on audio-video understanding. Preprint , arXiv:2601.21666. Ramaneswaran Selvakumar, Kaousheik Jayakumar, S Sakshi, Sreyan Ghosh, Ruohan Gao, and Di-nesh Manocha. 2026. Do audio-visual large lan-guage models really see and hear? arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.02605 .Amanpreet Singh, Vivek Natarajan, Meet Shah, Yu Jiang, Xinlei Chen, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Marcus Rohrbach. 2019. Towards vqa models that can read. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Per-rin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Mor-gane Rivière, Louis Rouillard, Thomas Mesnard, Ge-offrey Cideron, Jean bastien Grill, Sabela Ramos, Edouard Yvinec, Michelle Casbon, Etienne Pot, Ivo Penchev, and 197 others. 2025. Gemma 3 technical report. Preprint , arXiv:2503.19786. Cheng Wang, Gelei Deng, Xianglin Yang, Han Qiu, and Tianwei Zhang. 2025. When audio and text disagree: Revealing text bias in large audio-language models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Weiyao Wang, Du Tran, and Matt Feiszli. 2020. What makes training multi-modal classification networks hard? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 12695–12705. Xingrui Wang, Jiang Liu, Chao Huang, Xiaodong Yu, Ze Wang, Ximeng Sun, Jialian Wu, Alan Yuille, Emad Barsoum, and Zicheng Liu. 2026. XMod-bench: Benchmarking cross-modal capabilities and consistency in omni-language models. In The Four-teenth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .Liuyue Xie, Avik Kuthiala, George Z. Wei, Ce Zheng, Ananya Bal, Mosam Dabhi, Liting Wen, Taru Rustagi, Ethan Lai, Sushil Khyalia, Rohan Choud-hury, Morteza Ziyadi, Xu Zhang, Hao Yang, and Lás-zló A. Jeni. 2026. Maverix: Multimodal audio-visual evaluation and recognition index. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence .Yudong Yang, Jimin Zhuang, Guangzhi Sun, Changli Tang, Yixuan Li, Peihan Li, Yifan Jiang, Wei Li, Ze-jun Ma, and Chao Zhang. 2025. Audio-centric video understanding benchmark without text shortcut. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kaining Ying, Fanqing Meng, Jin Wang, Zhiqian Li, Han Lin, Yue Yang, Hao Zhang, Wenbo Zhang, Yuqi Lin, Shuo Liu, Jiayi Lei, Quanfeng Lu, Runjian Chen, Peng Xu, Renrui Zhang, Haozhe Zhang, Peng Gao, Yali Wang, Yu Qiao, and 3 others. 2024. Mmt-bench: A comprehensive multimodal benchmark for eval-uating large vision-language models towards multi-task agi. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 57116–57198. PMLR. Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang, Tianyu Zheng, Ruoqi Liu, Ge Zhang, Samuel Stevens, Dongfu Jiang, Weiming Ren, Yuxuan Sun, Cong Wei, Botao Yu, Ruibin Yuan, Renliang Sun, Ming Yin, Boyuan Zheng, Zhenzhu Yang, Yibo Liu, Wenhao Huang, and 3 others. 2024. Mmmu: A massive multi-discipline multimodal understanding and reasoning benchmark for expert agi. In Proceedings of CVPR .Xu Zheng, Chenfei Liao, Yuqian Fu, Kaiyu Lei, Yuan-huiyi Lyu, Lutao Jiang, Jialei Chen, Jiawen Wang, Chengxin Li, Linfeng Zhang, Danda Pani Paudel, Xu-anjing Huang, Yu-Gang Jiang, Nicu Sebe, Dacheng Tao, Luc Van Gool, and Xuming Hu. 2025. Mllms are deeply affected by modality bias. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.18657. A Data Sources 

For broad real-world coverage, we source base videos from Ego4D (Grauman et al., 2022), HowTo100M (Miech et al., 2019), EPIC-Kitchens (Damen et al., 2018, 2022), and OOPS (Ep-stein et al., 2020); base audio segments from HowTo100M; and base images from Visual Genome (Krishna et al., 2017), COCO (Lin et al., 2014), TextVQA (Singh et al., 2019), and Visual Counterfact (Golovanevsky et al., 2025). 

B Sample Generation Details 

Candidate Selection and Preprocessing. For each generation template, we manually determine an appropriate source dataset depending on the base modality. Using available annotations, be-tween 100–250 candidate base media files are se-lected according to the requirements of each tem-plate. Template-specific preprocessing operations (clipping the video, removing audio, extracting au-dio, etc.) are then applied to prepare the final base media sample. 

Media Generation Details. Gemini-3-Pro gen-erates the query/question together with detailed textual descriptions of the additional modalities re-quired to complete the sample. The corresponding media files are synthesized using Qwen3-TTS (Hu et al., 2026) for speech, AudioLDM2 (Liu et al., 2024) for non-speech audio, and Nano Banana Pro (DeepMind, 2025) for images. For generating the TTS files, we used the 

Qwen/Qwen3-TTS-12Hz-1.7B-VoiceDesign 

checkpoint from HuggingFace. To convert each transcript into its textual form, the transcript 

field of the generated sample is passed into the 

text field of the model’s generate method and the 

voice_style_prompt is passed into the instruct 

field, with all other parameters left to their default values and the outputs were saved with .wav 

extension. To generate the non-speech audio files, we used the cvssp/audioldm2-large checkpoint from Hug-gingFace. The transcript field of the generated samples is supposed to be empty in such cases because there is no speech to be generated, and only the voice_style_prompt field is expected to contain the description of the audio. In some cases this constraint was not followed by Gemini, so we used Gemma-3-12B to sanitise all samples before passing them to the audio generation model. Along with sanitisation, Gemma also returned the (expected) duration of the generated audio, since AudioLDM2 requires it to be explicitly set (for TTS samples, this is null ). Since it is a diffusion-based model, we set the num_inference_steps param-eter to 500 to ensure the generations are accurate and representative, and set the negative_prompt 

to “low quality”. 

Self-Audit Procedure. The generation prompt includes an explicit self-audit stage. A sample is considered inadmissible and revised if it can be solved by ignoring any modality, relying solely on commonsense or domain priors, contains so-lution leakage in the query, or admits ambiguous ground-truth answers. These checks are internally simulated before the final output is produced. The generator additionally produces a

template_selection_rationale describing whether and how well the selected base media satisfy the intended template, along with a

generation_confidence_score between 1 and 5 which is later used to filter the generated samples. 

C Filtering Details 

To avoid propagating the biases from the generator model, we opt to use Qwen3-30B-A3B-Thinking 

for filtering, as it is the biggest omnimodal model openly available. During filter-ing, the evaluator model re-verifies the 

template_selection_rationale against the actual generated media rather than relying only on textual descriptions. The evaluator also repeats all bypass and leakage checks performed during generation. In addition, the filtering stage produces a

difficulty_score between 1 and 10 for accepted samples ( −1 for rejected samples), where 1 cor-responds to trivial instances and 10 corresponds to samples requiring highly complex cross-modal reasoning. 

D Evaluation Details for LLM-as-a-Judge 

Apart from the Gemini family, Qwen3-Omni is the only open MLLM with strong perfor-mance. To avoid leakage and bias from the generator, we evaluate the responses of various models using Qwen3-Omni-30B-A3B-Thinking 

from HuggingFace. In the generation parameters, we set do_sample to False and temperature to 0. However, it is necessary to ensure that the capabil-ities of Qwen3 are sufficiently good for its use as a judge. To ensure this, we judged the responses of four models using Gemini-3-Flash also and com-puted the agreement rate and Cohen’s Kappa (κ)

between the Qwen3 and Gemini decisions. The average agreement was 93% and κ was 0.88 . The minimum κ was 0.74 and the maximum, 0.98 . This shows that the predictions of different models are similarly judged by both Qwen3 and Gemini despite the former being free from any generation bias. Thus, Qwen3-Omni’s decisions can be trusted in this scenario. 

E Human Evaluation Details 

To establish a robust human performance baseline and validate the solvability of the C 3PO dataset, we conducted a human evaluation on a representative subset of 250 samples. Our sampling strategy was designed to ensure a uniform distribution across both task types and template diversity. 

Stratified Round-Robin Sampling 

We first stratified the filtered dataset by its two primary categories (Information Composition and Counterfactual Reasoning). Within each category, samples were partitioned into four discrete diffi-culty tiers based on the difficulty scores obtained during filtration ( Bucket 1 : < 2.5, Bucket 2 :

2.5 − 4.9, Bucket 3 : 5.0 − 7.4, Bucket 4 : ≥ 7.5). The difficulty scores are all integers so the decimal boundaries are unimportant. We set a target of 25 samples per category-difficulty bucket. To ensure maximum task diversity, within each bucket we it-eratively selected samples from different templates so that no single was template over-represented in a difficulty tier. While the theoretical target was 300 samples, the constraints of our multi-stage filter-ing pipeline and the sparsity of samples in extreme difficulty tiers (Fig. 7) resulted in a final, fully validated evaluation set of 250 samples. 

Evaluation Interface and Accuracy 

Evaluators were provided with a Streamlit-based web interface displayed all relevant media streams (video, audio, and/or generated images) alongside the question, for each sample (Figure 8). Due to resource constraints, the samples were divided equally (in disjoint subsets) amongst three human evaluators, unrelated to this project, with each sam-ple receiving one answer. To ensure an equitable comparison, the human responses were evaluated using the same Gemma LLM judge described in 

Figure 7: Distribution of difficulty scores across the entire C 3PO dataset. 

the previous section. The following instructions were given to the human evaluators. 

Instructions to Human Evaluators                                                                                                           

> There a r e two t y p e s o f s a m p l e s : I n f o r m a t i o n C o m p o s i t i o n ( where t h e i n f o r m a t i o n t o f i n d t h e c o r r e c t answer i s s p r e a d a c r o s s m u l t i p l e m o d a l i t i e s ) and C o u n t e r f a c t u a l s ( where a t l e a s t two m o d a l i t i e s p r e s e n t c o n f l i c t i n g i n f o r m a t i o n , and t h e c o r r e c t has t o be d e t e r m i n e d by f o c u s i n g p r e c i s e l y on what t h e q u e s t i o n i s a s k i n g ) . Pay c a r e f u l a t t e n t i o n t o a l l t h e media f i l e s and t h e q u e s t i o n . Answer t h e q u e s t i o n d i r e c t l y , a c c u r a t e l y , and c o n c i s e l y b a s e d ONLY on t h e p r o v i d e d media s t r e a m s . Do not r e f u s e t o answer . Answer i n o n l y one word o r few words , not i n af u l l s e n t e n c e . The ground t r u t h answer i s o n l y one word o r few words and your answer has t o be s e m a n t i c a l l y e q u i v a l e n t t o t h e ground t r u t h answer t o be c o n s i d e r e d c o r r e c t . I f you b e l i e v e t h e r e i s i n s u f f i c i e n t i n f o r m a t i o n t o answer t h e q u e s t i o n , s a y \ t e x t b f { I n s u f f i c i e n t I n f o r m a t i o n } .

F Mechanistic Analysis: Probe Protocols and Cohort Detail 

This supplementary section accompanies Section 4 of the main paper. It documents the three probes (E1, E2, E3) in full, lists the cohort coverage ma-trix with the architectural reason for each model’s classification status, and reports the full per-model tables abbreviated in the main paper. 

F.1 Probe Protocols E1: layer-wise attention. For each sample we issue a structured prompt that asks the model to describe the audio and image contents and capture Figure 8: Streamlit interface for human evaluators showing all the different media streams along with the question and a field to write the answer. 

per-layer self-attention weights via the standard 

output_attentions=True mechanism. Eager at-tention is mandatory because the fused attention kernels (SDPA, FlashAttention) do not expose per-layer attention matrices. For each generated token, we average attention weights across heads to ob-tain an attention row over the input token positions, then normalise the row to a distribution. For each modality m ∈ { text , audio , image }, we sum the row’s mass over the input positions assigned to 

m by the modality-spans function for that model; this gives αm per layer per generated step. The per-sample, per-layer triple is the mean of these per-step triples over generated tokens. Video token positions are masked from E1 (and E2) across the cohort. At the sequence lengths produced by modern vision towers, the per-layer eager-attention tensor under typical C 3PO video samples reaches activation memory on the order of 10 11 bytes per forward pass, exceeding the GPU memory available for this cohort. We report α

statistics over text, audio and image positions only, uniformly across all probed models; the constraint affects all models equally and does not bias cross-model comparisons. 

E2: logit-lens latent recovery. For each sample we run a single forward pass with 

output_hidden_states=True , take the hidden state at each non-text token position, apply the model’s final-layer normalisation, project through the unembedding head WU , and select the top-

K predicted token IDs ( K = 10 throughout). The reference vocabulary for the sample is con-structed from the audio transcript and image de-scription: we lemmatise with spaCy, strip stop-words, and encode each remaining lemma with the model’s tokenizer (both with and without a leading space to handle subword-tokenizer asym-metry). A modality-position t is a hit at layer ℓ

if the top-K predicted token IDs at (ℓ, t ) intersect the reference vocabulary. We compute the hit rate for each modality on the last five layers and re-port latent m as the mean hit rate over positions and layers for modality m ∈ { audio , image , video };latent_recovery is the mean across all (modality, position, layer) triples. The reference-vocabulary builder caches per-sample, per-model. 

E3: caption fidelity. We issue a structured prompt asking the model to describe the audio and image contents and to format its response as “AU-DIO: . . . ” and “IMAGE: . . . ”. The model is run with greedy decoding and a 128 -token cap on the response. We score the response against two ref-erences: the Whisper-base ASR transcript of the sample’s audio (audio reference) and a separate image-only forward pass of the same model (image reference). Both fidelity scores are ROUGE-1 re-call of content words from the reference against the model’s response, lower-cased, stopword-stripped and lemmatised consistently. Through the main paper we refer to ROUGE-1 recall as fidelity .F.2 Cohort and Probe Coverage 

Ten open-source models are evaluated on C 3PO. Probe coverage is summarised in Table 4. Four models support the full E1 + E2 + E3 stack: Qwen2.5-Omni-3B, Qwen2.5-Omni-7B, Phi-4-Multimodal, and Gemma-3n-E4B. Five additional models contribute to E3 and to the dominance-versus-fusion error decomposition but cannot be probed at the routing level because their mul-timodal forward paths substitute media features into the embedding sequence before the language-model proper, leaving the post-substitution input identifiers undefined for span-based probing. 

F.3 Per-Model Routing Tables CC–IC attention fingerprint cosine. For each E1-supported model we compute the cohort-average attention vector (αtext , α audio , α image ) sep-arately on Counterfactual Conflict and Information Composition samples and report the cosine simi-larity between the two vectors (Table 5). All four models produce CC and IC fingerprints whose co-sine similarity exceeds 0.99 . The categorical shift between CC and IC, which drives substantial accu-racy differences in Table 3, is not reflected in atten-tion reallocation. The conflict-versus-composition decision is resolved downstream of attention. 

Per-tier CC–IC gap on audio attention. Table 6 gives the per-tier difference αCC  

> audio

− αIC  

> audio

for the three tiers where both categories are populated, and the CC-only αaudio at T4 (T4 contains no IC samples). The gap is uniformly negative at T1 and uniformly positive by T3 in every model. Figure 9 plots the per-tier audio and image attention sepa-rately by category. 

Logit-lens latent recovery (E2). Table 7 gives the cohort-mean E2 values per model. The two Qwen2.5-Omni sizes differ by approximately 0.045 

on every column while their E3 fidelities differ by less than 0.01 on every category: internal mul-timodal recovery scales with parameter count in the Qwen2.5-Omni family in a way that the output table does not show. 

Argmin-entropy depth. For each per-sample between-modality entropy curve we identify the relative depth at which the curve reaches its min-imum. The cohort mean per (model, category) is reported in Table 8, with bootstrap 95% CIs. The audio-bypass profile commits in the first third of the network; Gemma-3n-E4B commits past the midpoint. 

Cross-model audio-fidelity agreement (Z1). 

Sample-level Pearson correlation of audio_fidelity between model pairs (Table 9). The three audio-bypass members cluster at 0.94 –0.97 pairwise; Gemma-3n-E4B correlates with each member of that cluster at 0.45 ± 0.01 . The cluster structure in this table is one of the three independent mea-surements that distinguish the audio-bypass profile from the fusion-attentive profile. 

F.4 Mid-Layer Entropy and Judge Correctness: Full Table 

Table 10 reports the per-cell entropy-correctness 

∆H with bootstrap 95% CIs, complementing Fig-ure 4 of the main paper. Five of six cells reach significance. The absolute mid-layer entropy on judge-correct samples, reported by category, is given in Table 11. For every model, correct CC samples carry higher mid-layer entropy than correct IC samples, consis-tent with the interpretation that conflict resolution requires sustaining broader attention longer than composition does. 

F.5 Per-Template Failure-Mode Stratification 

Table 12 gives the per-template failure-mode dis-tribution for six representative templates, averaged across the open-source E3 cohort. Dominance fail-ures account for the great majority of wrong pre-dictions on every template, but which modality dominates is template-specific. The same model that fails by audio-dominance on AcousticScene-Mismatch fails by text-dominance on CausalMisat-tribution; the aggregated three-mode statistic in the body of the main paper averages over this template-level variation. Counterfactual templates whose deceptive evidence is auditory ( AcousticSceneMis-match 52% audio-dominance, QuantitativeFabri-cation 41% audio-dominance) drive failures where the model trusts the audio over the visual evidence; templates whose conflict resolution is verbalised in the question prompt ( CausalMisattribution 67% 

text-dominance, ProcedureVsEvidence 64% text-dominance) drive failures where the model defaults to a text-prior interpretation of the audio narrative without verifying it against the video. Model Profile Architectural status E3 status Qwen2.5-Omni-3B Audio-bypass E1, E2, E3 all measured. Standard HuggingFace multimodal interface. Audio-bypass signature confirmed at E3. Qwen2.5-Omni-7B Audio-bypass Same as above. Audio-bypass signature confirmed at E3. Phi-4-Multimodal Audio-bypass Same as above. Audio-bypass signature confirmed at E3. Gemma-3n-E4B Fusion-attentive E1, E2, E3 all measured. Standard interface. Fusion-attentive signa-ture confirmed at E3. VITA-1.5 Content-blind on image E1/E2 blocked: prepare_inputs_labels_for_multimodal 

substitutes audio/image features into inputs_embeds pre-LM-forward; post-substitution token positions cannot be located from 

input_ids . E3 is sufficient for this profile because image fi-delity is two orders of magnitude below cohort regardless of routing. Content-blind signature confirmed at E3. MiniCPM-o-2.6 Unclassified E1/E2 blocked: same architectural pattern as VITA. E3 fidelity within co-hort norms; insuffi-cient on its own to dis-tinguish audio-bypass from fusion-attentive. Gemma-4-E4B-It Unclassified E1/E2 partially blocked: the no-video-tower architecture restricts E1 to a subset of samples; on those samples the modality-span function returns αimage ≈ 0, indicating the image-span detection logic does not match Gemma-4’s tokenizer output. E2 ran on the full sample set. E3 audio fidelity unusu-ally low (0.32 /0.27 ); the model produces short, answer-focused outputs that do not echo the audio transcript, so caption-fidelity is a misleading indicator for this model. InteractiveOmni-4B Unclassified E1/E2 blocked: model.chat() constructs input_ids internally; the wrapper passed to the probe receives a sentinel dictionary without surfaced identifiers. E3 within cohort norms. InteractiveOmni-8B Unclassified Same blocker as InteractiveOmni-4B. E3 within cohort norms. PandaGPT-7B Unclassified (anomalous) E1/E2 blocked: OpenLLAMAPEFTModel.generate 

prepends an ImageBind-projected modality embedding to the text-prompt token embeddings; no input_ids exists for the post-prepend sequence. E3 audio fidelity 

0.036 /0.032 and image fidelity 0.13 /0.15 are both well below cohort; consistent with an embedding-fusion bot-tleneck distinct from the three primary profiles. 

Table 4: Cohort coverage. Five models are classified by their multi-probe signatures (or, for VITA-1.5, by E3 alone where the image-channel failure is decisive). Five additional models are unclassified because their multimodal forward paths block span-based probing. The unclassified models contribute to E3 and to the dominance-versus-fusion analysis but not to the routing analysis. T1 T2 T3 T4  

> Tier (no.\ of grounded modalities)
> 0.000 0.025 0.050 0.075 0.100 0.125 0.150 0.175 0.200
> audio
> IC unavailable at T4

(a) Audio attention     

> T1 T2 T3 T4
> Tier (no.\ of grounded modalities)
> 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
> image
> IC unavailable at T4

(b) Image attention 

> Qwen2.5-Omni-3B Qwen2.5-Omni-7B Phi-4-MM Gemma-3n CC (Counterfactual Conflict) IC (Information Composition)

Figure 9: Per-tier attention to (a) audio and (b) image across the four E1-supported models, separated by CC (dashed) and IC (solid). T4 contains only CC samples; IC curves are defined on T1–T3. 

## Model cos( αCC , α IC )

## Qwen2.5-Omni-3B 0.9995 

## Qwen2.5-Omni-7B 0.9995 

## Phi-4-Multimodal 0.9998 

## Gemma-3n-E4B 0.9912 

Table 5: CC–IC attention-fingerprint cosine, per model. 

Model T1 T2 T3 T4 (CC only) Qwen2.5-Omni-3B −0.024 −0.010 +0 .031 0.075 

Qwen2.5-Omni-7B −0.021 −0.008 +0 .021 0.070 

Gemma-3n-E4B −0.046 −0.034 +0 .008 0.098 

Phi-4-Multimodal −0.027 +0 .003 +0 .008 0.015 

Table 6: Per-tier αCC  

> audio

− αIC  

> audio

for T1–T3; T4 column reports CC-only αaudio because T4 has no IC samples by design. 

Model latent_recovery latent audio latent image 

Qwen2.5-Omni-3B 0.225 0.190 0.318 

Qwen2.5-Omni-7B 0.269 0.232 0.365 

Gemma-3n-E4B 0.195 0.127 0.420 

Phi-4-Multimodal 0.211 0.161 0.292 

Table 7: Logit-lens latent recovery (E2). Mean fraction of (modality-token , layer ) pairs whose top-K projection hits the reference vocabulary. 

Model CC IC Phi-4-Multimodal 0.11 [0 .10 , 0.11] 0.13 [0 .13 , 0.14] 

Qwen2.5-Omni-3B 0.27 [0 .26 , 0.28] 0.24 [0 .23 , 0.25] 

Qwen2.5-Omni-7B 0.27 [0 .27 , 0.28] 0.31 [0 .30 , 0.32] 

Gemma-3n-E4B 0.57 [0 .56 , 0.57] 0.54 [0 .53 , 0.55] 

Table 8: Relative depth at which the per-sample between-modality entropy reaches its minimum; brack-ets give bootstrap 95% CIs on the cohort mean. 

Qwen2.5-3B Qwen2.5-7B Gemma-3n Phi-4 Qwen2.5-3B — 0.956 0.462 0.968 

Qwen2.5-7B — 0.446 0.945 

Gemma-3n — 0.449 

Phi-4 —

Table 9: Sample-level Pearson correlation of audio_fidelity between model pairs.                 

> Model ∆HCC (bits) ∆HIC (bits) Qwen2.5-Omni-7B +0 .168 [+0 .140 ,+0 .197] +0 .016 [ −0.011 ,+0 .042]
> Gemma-3n-E4B +0 .052 [+0 .016 ,+0 .088] +0 .050 [+0 .011 ,+0 .091]
> Phi-4-Multimodal +0 .053 [+0 .020 ,+0 .088] +0 .090 [+0 .055 ,+0 .123]

Table 10: Mid-layer entropy difference between judge-correct and judge-incorrect samples, with bootstrap 95% 

CIs. The Qwen2.5-Omni-7B IC cell is the only cell whose CI crosses zero. 

Model Hmid | correct, CC Hmid | correct, IC Qwen2.5-Omni-7B 0.812 0.639 

Gemma-3n-E4B 0.997 0.950 

Phi-4-Multimodal 0.764 0.753 

Table 11: Absolute mid-layer between-modality entropy (bits) on judge-correct samples, by category. Template dom-aud dom-img dom-txt inc-fus CausalMisattribution 18% 4% 67% 6%                     

> QuantitativeFabrication 41% 8% 31% 9%
> AcousticSceneMismatch 52% 6% 17% 11%
> ProcedureVsEvidence 14% 5% 64% 5%
> DisclaimedEvidence 23% 7% 12% 8%
> AttributeAuthorityArbitration 31% 15% 9% 7%

Table 12: Per-template failure-mode distribution for six representative templates, averaged across the open-source E3 cohort. Columns: dom-aud = dominance by audio, dom-img = dominance by image, dom-txt =dominance by text or prior, inc-fus = incomplete fusion. Figure 10: Depicts the Hallucination/Prior Bias failure mode in Gemini-3.1-Pro. The video shows the man losing balance while carrying a large TV, the audio contains misleading information about the man tripping over a toolbox, but the model ignores both these pieces of information and makes up something entirely irrelevant not supported by any evidence. 

G Generation Template 

Example Template: InstructionalGapDetection 

" t e m p l a t e _ i d " : "D_T1_001" , " template_name " : " I n s t r u c t i o n a l G a p D e t e c t i o n " , " c a t e g o r y " : "DISPERSAL ( T i e r 1 ) " , " b a s e _ m o d a l i t y " : " v i d e o " , " l o g i c a l _ f o r m " : "VIDEO shows a c o m p l e t e a c t i o n s e q u e n c e [ S1 . . . Sn ] ( muted ) ; AUDIO n a r r a t e s a s u b s e t [ S ( k ) . . . Sn ] s t a r t i n g midway u s i n g o r d i n a l m a r k e r s i m p l y i n g c o n t i n u i t y ( e . g . , ' F i r s t , do S ( k ) ' ) ; TEXT a s k s f o r t h e unmentioned i n i t i a l s t e p [ S1 . . . S ( k - 1 ) ] ; ANSWER r e q u i r e s i d e n t i f y i n g a c t i o n s v i s i b l e i n t h e v i d e o ' s o p e n i n g t h a t a r e o m i t t e d from t h e a u d i o n a r r a t i v e . " , " e x a m p l e _ s c e n a r i o " : " Video shows washing v e g e t a b l e s ( S1 ) t h e n c h o p p i n g them ( S2 ) . Audio s t a r t s : ' F i r s t , chop t h e v e g e t a b l e s . ' Text : 'What m i s s i n g s t e p must be done b e f o r e t h e i n s t r u c t i o n s s t a r t ? ' Answer : Washing . " , " g e n e r a t i o n _ s p e c " : {" v i d e o " : {" s o u r c e _ d a t a s e t " : "HowTo100M / EPIC - K i t c h e n s " , " s e l e c t i o n _ f i l t e r " : {" r e q u i r e m e n t " : " C l i p c o n t a i n i n g a d i s t i n c t m u l t i - s t e p p r o c e d u r a l s e q u e n c e . " , } , " p r o c e s s i n g " : "Mute o r i g i n a l a u d i o . " } , " a u d i o " : {" s o u r c e _ t y p e " : " g e n e r a t i o n (TTS) " , " c o n t e n t _ l o g i c " : " G e n e r a t e i n s t r u c t i o n s f o r t h e LAST (N- 1 ) s t e p s o n l y . " , " c o n s t r a i n t s " : " S t a r t w i t h t r a n s i t i o n a l m a r k e r s ( e . g . , ' Next ' , 'Then ' ) t o c r e a t e a f a l s e s e n s e o f s t a r t i n g . " } , " t e x t " : {" q u e r y _ s k e l e t o n " : " Based on t h e v i d e o , what p r e p a r a t i o n s t e p o c c u r r e d i m m e d i a t e l y b e f o r e t h e n a r r a t o r s a i d '{{ t r a n s i t i o n _ w o r d }} '?" }}

H Qualitative Examples from the C 3PO Dataset Category  Tier  Template Name Template-Level Sample Count Tier-Level Sample Count Category-Level Sample Count 

> Information Composition Tier 1 AttributeComposition  200 692 1363 InstructionalGapDetection  164 OffScreenCausality  31 QuantitativeVerification  185 SpatialConfiguration  48 TemporalSequencing  64 Tier 2 ContextualReinterpretation  111 624 FeatureTracking  100 LiveEventAttribution  101 SilentOutcomeInference  312 Tier 3  ReferenceObjectAppearance  47  47 Counterfactual Reasoning Tier 1 AttributeAuthorityArbitration  36 729 2041 ContainerContentDispute  137 LiveVsRecorded  138 OutdatedVisualEvidence  224 QuantitativeFabrication  181 TemporalContextArbitration  13 Tier 2 AcousticSceneMismatch  97 857 CausalMisattribution  359 HistoricalVsPresent  154 LiveNarrationMismatch  57 ProcedureVsEvidence  190 Tier 3  DisclaimedEvidence  172  292 MeasurementAuthorityChain  120 Tier 4  ComplianceReportingBias  163  163
> Total  3404
> Table 13: C 3PO fine-grained sample distribution across categories, tiers, and templates.

Figure 11: Depicts the Modality Interference/Dominance failure mode in Gemini-3.1-Pro where the video depicts a person riding a board down a sandy slope. The audio makes a misleading claim that the rider loses control because the board snaps, but that does not happen as seen in the video. The rider crashes due to the board’s nose digging into the sand. Thus, the model trusts the audio modality blindly without verifying the visual evidence. 

Figure 12: Depicts an instance of lack of effective Cross-Modal Fusion . The video shows the person opening the fridge to grab something from inside the fridge, not to put the basil sauce inside. However, the audio states that the basil sauce has been put inside and the image shows a warning sign that says food must be covered before storing. The model conflates the man opening the fridge with putting the basil sauce inside, and also incorrectly says the sauce is covered which it is not. (a) 

(b) 

(c) (d) 

Figure 4: Some more qualitative examples. 

I Prompt Details 

Sample Generation Prompt 

We used Gemini-3-Pro to generate the samples in the benchmark datasets using the prompts given below. temperature was set to 1.0 and the response_mime_type was set to application/json to get a structured JSON output. 

Generation Prompt: System Prompt 

**SYSTEM ROLE** You a r e t h e **Omni - Modal Benchmark A r c h i t e c t * * . Your p u r p o s e i s t o c o n s t r u c t high - d i f f i c u l t y t e s t s a m p l e s t h a t r i g o r o u s l y e v a l u a t e whether a m u l t i m o d a l model i s t r u l y " omni " ( p r o c e s s i n g t e x t , audio , and v i s u a l s t r e a m s s i m u l t a n e o u s l y ) o r m e r e l y r e l y i n g on unimodal s h o r t c u t s . **OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE** You w i l l be p r o v i d e d w i t h a ** L o g i c Template ** and a s p e c i f i c ** Base Media I n p u t * * . You must NOT s i m p l y match keywords . You must a n a l y z e t h e media t o d e t e r m i n e why , i f a t a l l , t h e t e m p l a t e i s a p p r o p r i a t e f o r t h e b a s e media , and t h e n g e n e r a t e t h e r e m a i n i n g components i n a way t h a t c r e a t e s t h e most c h a l l e n g i n g p o s s i b l e sample f o r t h a t s p e c i f i c b a s e media f o l l o w i n g t h e l o g i c s p e c i f i e d i n t h e t e m p l a t e . Do not b l i n d l y f o l l o w t h e example p r o v i d e d i n t h e t e m p l a t e , come up w i t h a u n i q u e s c e n a r i o t h a t f i t s t h e l o g i c and maximizes t h e d i f f i c u l t y f o r t h a t s p e c i f i c media w h i l e a l s o b e i n g a s r e a l i s t i c and n a t u r a l a s p o s s i b l e . **CORE WORKFLOW** 1 . ** Media A n a l y s i s : * * Deeply a n a l y z e t h e b a s e m o d a l i t y . What a r e i t s s t r o n g e s t f e a t u r e s ? ( f o r example , p r e c i s e t e x t l a b e l s , s u b t l e t e m p o r a l c u e s , e n v i r o n m e n t a l a m b i g u i t y e t c . ) . 2 . ** Template f i t : * * Why t h i s t e m p l a t e and t h i s b a s e media f i l e a r e w e l l s u i t e d f o r e a c h o t h e r . I n c l u d e a s c o r e i n t h e r a t i o n a l e a s f o l l o w s " $# ### <SCORE > # ###$ " where SCORE i s between 1 and 5 ( 5 i s p e r f e c t f i t and 1 i s p o o r f i t ) and t h e a n g l e b r a c k e t s a r e not t o be i n c l u d e d . I f t h e y do not f i l l w e l l , s p e c i f y t h a t c l e a r l y . I n c l u d e t h e p h r a s e "THIS BASE MEDIA DOES NOT FIT THE GIVEN LOGIC" v e r b a t i m i n t h e r a t i o n a l e i f you d e t e r m i n e t h a t t h e b a s e media i s not v e r y w e l l a l i g n e d w i t h t h e t e m p l a t e l o g i c . 3 . ** G e n e r a t i o n \& Audit : * * S y n t h e s i z e t h e sample and run t h e ** Bypass T e s t * * . **THE BYPASS TEST (SELF -CORRECTION) ** B e f o r e f i n a l i z i n g any sample , you must SIMULATE t h e f o l l o w i n g c h e c k s w i t h i n your own r e a s o n i n g . I f t h e sample f a i l s * any * check , t h a t sample i s i n a d m i s s i b l e and you MUST r e v i s e i t : 1 . ** M i s s i n g M o d a l i t y : * * Can t h e q u e s t i o n be answered u s i n g t h e Text + Image / Video a l o n e ( i g n o r i n g Audio ) ? -> * R e s u l t must be NO. * * **The B l i n d T e s t : * * Can t h e q u e s t i o n be answered u s i n g Text + Audio a l o n e ( i g n o r i n g Image / Video ) ? -> * R e s u l t must be NO. * I n e f f e c t , i f t h e sample can be answered c o r r e c t l y by i g n o r i n g ANY o f t h e g i v e n m o d a l i t i e s , i t i s a f a i l u r e . 2 . **The P r i o r T e s t : * * Can t h e q u e s t i o n be answered u s i n g common s e n s e o r w o r l d knowledge o r domain - s p e c i f i c knowledge w i t h o u t l o o k i n g / l i s t e n i n g ? -> * R e s u l t must be NO. * 3 . **The Ambiguity Check : * * I s t h e r e * e x a c t l y one * l o g i c a l answer ? ( E s p e c i a l l y f o r C o u n t e r f a c t u a l s : d o e s t h e prompt i m p l i c i t l y but c l e a r l y s i g n a l which m o d a l i t y h o l d s t h e t r u t h ? ) -> * R e s u l t must be YES . * 4 . **The " F r o n t i e r P r i o r " Check : * * I f a model can u s e common s e n s e o r l i n g u i s t i c p a t t e r n s t o " g u e s s " t h e answer w i t h o u t r e f e r r i n g t o t h e media , t h e sample i s INVALID . 5 . ** I t e r a t i v e R e f i n e m e n t : * * You must e v a l u a t e your own g e n e r a t i o n a g a i n s t t h e s e c h e c k s . I f you can c o r r e c t l y s o l v e t h e sample w i t h o u t c o m p l e t e l y u s i n g i n f o r m a t i o n from ALL m o d a l i t i e s , i t i s i n v a l i d . I f i t f a i l s , r e v i s e t h e q u e r y o r t r a n s c r i p t u n t i l t h e f u s i o n i s mandatory . 6 . **The V e r b o s i t y Check : * * I s t h e q u e s t i o n t o o l o n g and v e r b o s e and r e v e a l s e x t r a i n f o r m a t i o n o r c o n t e x t about t h e sample ? Does i t c o n t a i n f o r b i d d e n meta - words ( audio , v i d e o , n a r r a t o r , v i s u a l , d i s c r e p a n c y ) ? -> * Answer t o both must be NO. * **DESIGN PRINCIPLES** 1 . ** Co here nt I n d e p e n d e n c e : * * T r e a t m o d a l i t i e s a s i n d e p e n d e n t s t r e a m s o f i n f o r m a t i o n . The c o n t e n t o f t h e Audio must n e v e r be g u e s s a b l e s i m p l y by l o o k i n g a t t h e Video ( and v i c e v e r s a ) . I n f o r m a t i o n c o m p o s i t i o n i s mandatory . However , t h e f i n a l sample must r e p r e s e n t a c o h e r e n t , r e a l i s t i c s c e n a r i o . 2 . **The I n f o r m a t i o n Gap ( D i s p e r s a l ) : * * One m o d a l i t y p r o v i d e s t h e I d e n t i t y , t h e o t h e r s p r o v i d e t h e S e l e c t o r . The Text Query i s t h e b r i d g e . The answer must e x i s t o n l y a t t h e i n t e r s e c t i o n . 3 . **The H i e r a r c h y o f T r u s t ( C o u n t e r f a c t u a l s ) : * * Never e x p l i c i t l y s t a t e " T r u s t t h e v i d e o . " Do not i n s t r u c t t h e model t o l o o k f o r a d i s c r e p a n c y . 4 . ** Zero - Hint P h r a s i n g (NEGATIVE CONSTRAINTS) : * * * DO NOT u s e meta - v o c a b u l a r y . You must NEVER u s e words l i k e " a u d i o " , " v i d e o " , " image " , " n a r r a t o r " , " s p e a k e r " , " v i s u a l e v i d e n c e " , " d i s c r e p a n c y " , " c l a i m " , o r " c o n t e x t " i n t h e t e x t q u e r y . * DO NOT s e t t h e s c e n e o r e x p l a i n t h e p r e m i s e i n t h e q u e r y . * DO NOT u s e timestamps , c o o r d i n a t e s , o r d i r e c t synonyms from t h e v i s u a l l a b e l s o r a u d i o t r a n s c r i p t . 5 . ** A g g r e s s i v e C o n c i s e n e s s : * * The t e x t q u e r y must NOT e x c e e d 12 words . Ask t h e c o r e q u e s t i o n a s b l u n t l y and d i r e c t l y a s p o s s i b l e . 6 . ** Template S k e l e t o n S a n i t i z a t i o n * * : I f a p r o v i d e d L o g i c Template i n c l u d e s a" q u e r y _ s k e l e t o n " w i t h d e s c r i p t i v e h i n t s , you must i g n o r e t h a t s k e l e t o n and r e w r i t e t h e q u e r y t o a d h e r e t o t h e Zero - Hint and C o n c i s e n e s s c o n s t r a i n t s . **STRICT OUTPUT PROTOCOL** Output s t r i c t JSON . The JSON must i n c l u d e your r a t i o n a l e and your s e l f - a u d i t c o n f i r m a t i o n . 

Prompt for Sample Generation: User Prompt 

**TASK INSTRUCTIONS** I am p r o v i d i n g you w i t h a ** L o g i c Template ** and a ** Base M o d a l i t y I n p u t * * . **STEP 1 : SYNTHESIZE SAMPLE** 1 . G e n e r a t e t h e m i s s i n g components ( Audio s c r i p t , Text query , Image ) and d e f i n e t h e h a n d l i n g o f t h e Base Media . * ** Audio L o g i c : * * * I f u s i n g ** G en e r a te d Audio (TTS) * * : D e f i n e t h e t r a n s c r i p t and s t y l e i n 

` generated_components ` .* I f u s i n g ** N a t i v e Audio ** ( O r i g i n a l v i d e o sound ) : Do NOT i n c l u d e i t i n 

` generated_components ` . I n s t e a d , s p e c i f y " R e t a i n o r i g i n a l a u d i o " i n t h e 

` p r o c e s s i n g _ a c t i o n ` f i e l d . 2 . Ensure t h e a u d i o s o u n d s n a t u r a l ( s p e c i f i c t o n e s , e m o t i o n s , i n t e n t ) and f o l l o w s t h e t e m p l a t e ' s l o g i c . The n a t u r e o f t h e a u d i o ( s p e a k e r gender , s p e a k e r a c c e n t , pace , i n t o n a t i o n , timbre , emotion , p a u s e s ) s h o u l d be s p e c i f i e d p r e c i s e l y and i n t h o r o u g h d e t a i l and you s h o u l d e n s u r e t h a t i t l o g i c a l l y f i t s t h e s c e n a r i o and maximizes t h e d i f f i c u l t y . 3 . For t e m p l a t e s t h a t r e q u i r e g e n e r a t i n g images , o u t p u t a d e t a i l e d c a p t i o n o f t h e image which can be u s e d t o g e n e r a t e t h e r e q u i r e d image u s i n g a t e x t - to - image model . The c a p t i o n s h o u l d s u f f i c i e n t l y h i g h l i g h t and s p e c i f y t h e a s p e c t s o f t h e g e n e r a t e d image on which t h e sample r e l i e s t h e most . The c a p t i o n s h o u l d a l s o be s p e c i f i c enough s u c h t h a t i t can match t h e c o n t e n t s o f t h e v i d e o a s c l o s e l y a s p o s s i b l e t o seem r e l a t e d and n a t u r a l . 4 . The t e x t q u e r y must s t r i c t l y f o l l o w t h e Zero - Hint P h r a s i n g p r i n c i p l e . DO NOT w r i t e q u e s t i o n s l o n g e r than 12 words . DO NOT e x p l a i n t h e s i t u a t i o n . DO NOT r e f e r e n c e t h e m o d a l i t i e s . 5 . A l l g e n e r a t e d components s h o u l d be l o g i c a l l y c o n s i s t e n t w i t h t h e b a s e media and e a c h o t h e r , and s h o u l d maximize t h e d i f f i c u l t y o f t h e sample w h i l e s e e m i n g n a t u r a l and c o h e r e n t . But i t s h o u l d not t e s t o t h e r a b i l i t i e s o f t h e model l i k e complex a r i t h m e t i c o r r e a s o n i n g o r domain - s p e c i f i c knowledge o r commonsense knowledge . **STEP 2 : MANDATORY SELF -AUDIT** C r i t i q u e your own g e n e r a t i o n . Ensure i t p a s s e s t h e " Bypass T e s t " d e s c r i b e d i n t h e System Prompt . I f t h e answer i s g u e s s a b l e w i t h o u t a l l m o d a l i t i e s , REWRITE IT . **INPUT DATA** <t e m p l a t e > {TEMPLATE} </t e m p l a t e > <base_input_modality> {BASE_MODALITY_INPUT} </base_input_modality> <b a s e _ i n p u t _ f i l e > {BASE_MODALITY_FILE} </ b a s e _ i n p u t _ f i l e > **OUTPUT FORMAT** G e n e r a t e t h e f o l l o w i n g JSON r e s p o n s e . Do not i n c l u d e markdown t e x t o u t s i d e t h e JSON b l o c k . {{ " sample_id " : "{TEMPLATE_ID}_{ i d x } " , " t e m p l a t e _ s e l e c t i o n _ r a t i o n a l e " : " B r i e f l y e x p l a i n why you c h o s e t h i s s p e c i f i c t e m p l a t e o v e r o t h e r s . Why d o e s t h i s c r e a t e t h e h a r d e s t p o s s i b l e sample f o r t h i s s p e c i f i c b a s e media ? " , " t e m p l a t e _ i d " : "{TEMPLATE_ID} " , " template_name " : " [ Name ] " , " b a s e _ m o d a l i t y " : {{ " t y p e " : "{BASE_MODALITY_INPUT} " , " s o u r c e _ f i l e " : "{BASE_MODALITY_FILE} " , " content_summary " : " [ B r i e f summary o f what i s a c t u a l l y i n t h e media ] " , " p r o c e s s i n g _ a c t i o n " : " [ e . g . , Mute o r i g i n a l audio , Crop , e t c . ] " } } , " generated_components " : {{ " a u d i o " : {{ " t r a n s c r i p t " : " [ The spoken words ] " , " v o i c e _ s t y l e _ p r o m p t " : " [ D e s c r i p t i o n o f tone , speed , emotion ] " , " l o g i c _ c h e c k " : " [ I n t e r n a l n o t e : How d o e s t h i s a u d i o c o n n e c t t o t h e v i s u a l w i t h o u t g i v i n g away t h e answer ? ] " } } , " t e x t " : {{ " r o l e " : " u s e r _ q u e r y " , " c o n t e n t " : " [ The prompt p r e s e n t e d t o t h e model ] " , " r e a s o n i n g _ r e q u i r e d " : " [ E x p l a n a t i o n o f t h e m u l t i - s t e p i n f e r e n c e c h a i n r e q u i r e d ] " } } , " image " : " [ D e s c r i p t i o n i f an image n e e d s t o be g e n e r a t e d / cropped , e l s e n u l l ] " } } , " ground_truth " : {{ " answer " : " [ The s p e c i f i c , c o r r e c t answer ] " , " e v i d e n c e _ m o d a l i t y " : " [ Which s o u r c e h o l d s t h e t r u t h ? e . g . , ' v i s u a l _ i n f e r e n c e ' ,

' a u d i o _ v i s u a l _ f u s i o n ' ] " , " t i m e s t a m p _ e v i d e n c e " : " [ Time r a n g e i f v i d e o ] " } } , " s e l f _ a u d i t " : {{ " mute_test_passed " : t r u e , " b l i n d _ t e s t _ p a s s e d " : t r u e , " p r i o r _ t e s t _ p a s s e d " : t r u e , " ambiguity_check_passed " : t r u e , " n o t e s " : " [ B r i e f c o n f i r m a t i o n t h a t t h e sample c a n n o t be s o l v e d v i a s h o r t c u t s ] " }} }} **REFERENCE EXAMPLES (Do not copy s p e c i f i c c o n t e n t , o n l y s t r u c t u r e . ) ** <e x a m p l e _ 1 _ d i s p e r s a l > {{ " sample_id " : " gen_sample_001 " , " t e m p l a t e _ s e l e c t i o n _ r a t i o n a l e " : " I n s e r t r a t i o n a l e h e r e " , " t e m p l a t e _ i d " : "D_T1_001" , " template_name " : " I n s t r u c t i o n a l G a p D e t e c t i o n " , " b a s e _ m o d a l i t y " : {{ " t y p e " : " v i d e o " , " content_summary " : " P e r s o n c u t s p i z z a ( 0 : 0 0 - 0 : 0 8 ) , t h e n p o u r s o i l ( 0 : 0 9 - 0 : 1 6 ) . " } } , " generated_components " : {{ " a u d i o " : {{ " t r a n s c r i p t " : " P e r f e c t . Next , t a k e t h a t b o t t l e o f c h i l i o i l and d r i z z l e i t . . . " , " v o i c e _ s t y l e _ p r o m p t " : " C a s u a l i n s t r u c t i o n a l v o i c e , p i c k i n g up mid - s e n t e n c e . " } } , " t e x t " : {{ " r o l e " : " u s e r _ q u e r y " , " c o n t e n t " : "What a c t i o n o c c u r r e d i m m e d i a t e l y b e f o r e t h e word ' Next ' ? " }} } } , " ground_truth " : {{ " answer " : " C u t t i n g t h e p i z z a . " , " e v i d e n c e _ m o d a l i t y " : " v i d e o " }} }} </e x a m p l e _ 1 _ d i s p e r s a l > <e x a m p l e _ 2 _ c o u n t e r f a c t u a l > {{ " sample_id " : " gen_sample_002 " , " t e m p l a t e _ i d " : "C_T2_004" , " template_name " : " A c o u s t i c S c e n e M i s m a t c h " , " b a s e _ m o d a l i t y " : {{ " t y p e " : " v i d e o " , " content_summary " : " R e s i d e n t i a l a r e a , heavy r a i n , dark s k i e s . " } } , " generated_components " : {{ " t e x t " : {{ " r o l e " : " q u e r y " , " c o n t e n t " : "What i s t h e c u r r e n t w e a t h e r c o n d i t i o n ?" }} } } , " ground_truth " : {{ " answer " : " Heavy t h u n d e r s t o r m . " , " e v i d e n c e _ m o d a l i t y " : " audio - v i s u a l f u s i o n " }} }} </e x a m p l e _ 2 _ c o u n t e r f a c t u a l > 

Audio Sanitisation Prompt for Gemma 

You a r e an e x p e r t a u d i o p r o c e s s i n g d i r e c t o r . Your j o b i s t o l o o k a t a t r a n s c r i p t and av o i c e s t y l e prompt , and d e t e r m i n e : 1 . I s t h i s t e x t meant t o be sp oken by a human/ n a r r a t o r (TTS) , o r i s i t a d e s c r i p t i o n o f asound e f f e c t / e n v i r o n m e n t a l n o i s e (SFX) ? 2 . I f i t i s SFX , e s t i m a t e a r e a l i s t i c d u r a t i o n i n s e c o n d s f o r t h i s sound ( between 1 and 10 s e c o n d s ) . For example : a g u n s h o t = 2 s , a dog b a r k i n g = 4 s , background r a i n = 6 - 8 s . I f i t i s TTS, s e t d u r a t i o n t o n u l l . 3 . I f i t i s SFX , i f t h e t r a n s c r i p t i s an empty s t r i n g o r i s n u l l o r c o n t a i n s some p l a c e h o l d e r l i k e [ non - s p e e c h a u d i o ] o r [ non -TTS a u d i o ] t h e n c o n s o l i d a t e t h e u s e f u l i n f o r m a t i o n from both s t y l e prompt i n t o a s i n g l e , c l e a n t e x t - to - a u d i o prompt ( e . g . , "A heavy wooden d o o r slamming s h u t " ) . Remove any u s e l e s s p l a c e h o l d e r s l i k e " [ non - s p e e c h sound ] " o r " n u l l " . I f i t i s TTS, s e t t h i s t o n u l l . I f t h e t r a n s c r i p t i s a l r e a d y a c c u r a t e , p r e c i s e , and u s e f u l , t h e n r e t u r n t h a t v e r b a t i m . 4 . I f i t i s TTS, t h e t r a n s c r i p t *SHOULD NOT* c o n t a i n any meta i n f o r m a t i o n , s t y l e , tone , o r any o t h e r d e s c r i p t o r s o r i n f o r m a t i o n t h a t i s not meant t o be sp oken v e r b a t i m . I f t h e t r a n s c r i p t c o n t a i n s s t y l e o r t o n e i n f o r m a t i o n , i t i s your j o b t o r e c o g n i z e t h a t and move i t t o t h e SFX prompt f i e l d , and c l e a n up t h e t r a n s c r i p t t o o n l y c o n t a i n t h e words t h a t s h o u l d be spok en . 5 . Some s a m p l e s may be a mix o f SFX and TTS . Depending on t h e dominant component , c l a s s i f y a s e i t h e r TTS o r SFX , but do your b e s t t o e x t r a c t t h e u s e f u l i n f o r m a t i o n f o r both f i e l d s . Output STRICTLY i n t h i s JSON f o r m a t and n o t h i n g e l s e : {" audio_type " : "TTS" o r "SFX" , " d u r a t i o n _ s e c o n d s " : <i n t o r n u l l >, " sfx_prompt " : "< s t r i n g o r n u l l >" }

Filtering Prompt 

You a r e t h e ** Multimodal Benchmark A u d i t o r * * . Your j o b i s t o r i g o r o u s l y f i l t e r a s y n t h e t i c d a t a s e t o f a d v e r s a r i a l m u l t i m o d a l benchmark s a m p l e s . You must r e j e c t any sample t h a t i s weak , l o g i c a l l y f l a w e d , o r l e a k s i n f o r m a t i o n t o t h e t a r g e t model . **THE 4 -PILLAR EVALUATION RUBRIC** You must e v a l u a t e t h e p r o v i d e d sample a g a i n s t t h e s e 4 s t r i c t p i l l a r s . I f i t f a i l s ANY p i l l a r , you must REJECT i t . 1 . ** Media V e r i f i a b i l i t y ** - Do t h e media f i l e s EXACTLY match t h e i r CORRESPONDING t e x t u a l d e s c r i p t i o n s p r o v i d e d i n t h e sample ? The b a s e m o d a l i t y ( v i d e o / a u d i o / image ) must match t h e c o n t e n t summary , t h e g e n e r a t e d a u d i o must match t h e p r o v i d e d t e x t u a l t r a n s c r i p t , and t h e g e n e r a t e d image ( i f any ) must match t h e t e x t u a l d e s c r i p t i o n i n t h e " image " f i e l d . The b a s e m o d a l i t y and g e n e r a t e d components a r e g i v e n i n t h e g e n e r a t i o n t e m p l a t e l a t e r . - Can t h e s t a t e d Ground Truth answer be d e f i n i t i v e l y p r o v e n u s i n g ONLY t h e p r o v i d e d Base Media and t h e g e n e r a t e d components ( t r a n s c r i p t / c a p t i o n ) ? - R e j e c t i f t h e media l a c k s t h e r e q u i r e d v i s u a l / a u d i o i n f o r m a t i o n t o s u p p o r t t h e answer . - Are a l l media and t h e e n t i r e sample i s i n t h e E n g l i s h l a n g u a g e ? I f not , REJECT . - Are a l l t h e media f i l e s c o h e r e n t and c l e a r l y u n d e r s t a n d a b l e ? I f not , REJECT . 2 . ** Query S a n i t i z a t i o n ** - The Text Query MUST be s h o r t and n o n d e s c r i p t . - The Text Query MUST NOT c o n t a i n meta - v o c a b u l a r y ( e . g . , " a u d i o " , " v i d e o " , " n a r r a t o r " , " v i s u a l " , " d i s c r e p a n c y " , " c l a i m " , " image " ) . - R e j e c t i f t h e q u e r y e x p l a i n s t h e s i t u a t i o n o r g u i d e s t h e model on *how* t o s o l v e o r answer t h e q u e s t i o n c o r r e c t l y . - Does t h e q u e s t i o n make s e n s e r e a l i s t i c a l l y , and d o e s i t seem n a t u r a l ? -> Should be YES . Does t h e q u e s t i o n seem u n n e c e s s a r i l y c r y p t i c and f a b r i c a t e d ? -> Should be NO. 3 . ** Template Alignment ** - Does t h e sample a c t u a l l y f u l f i l l t h e l o g i c o f t h e p r o v i d e d Template ? - For D i s p e r s a l : Does t h e answer r e q u i r e c o m b i n i n g v a r i a b l e s from ALL s t r e a m s ? ( I f i t ' ss o l v a b l e WITHOUT r e q u i r i n g a l l m o d a l i t i e s , REJECT) . - For C o u n t e r f a c t u a l s : I s t h e r e a c l e a r , s u b t l e c o n t r a d i c t i o n where one m o d a l i t y must be t r u s t e d o v e r t h e o t h e r ? Can t h e ground t r u t h answer be unambiguously d e t e r m i n e d ? ( I f i t ' s j u s t two u n r e l a t e d s t a t e m e n t s , r e j e c t ) . - The sample has a f i e l d " t e m p l a t e _ s e l e c t i o n _ r a t i o n a l e " which i s p r o v i d e d by t h e g e n e r a t o r , a s a r a t i o n a l e f o r why t h e b a s e media i s a good f i t f o r t h a t p a r t i c u l a r t e m p l a t e . A n a l y s e i t t h o r o u g h l y and d e t e r m i n e i t s v a l i d i t y and c o r r e c t n e s s w i t h r e g a r d s t o t h e G e n e r a t i o n C o n f i d e n c e S c o r e ( a v a i l a b l e l a t e r i n t h e prompt ) . I f t h e C o n f i d e n c e S c o r e i s 5 but t h e r a t i o n a l e i s shaky t h e n i t i s l i k e l y a weak sample . 4 . ** C o h e r e n c e and N a t u r a l n e s s ** - Does t h e c o m b i n a t i o n o f media , a u d i o t r a n s c r i p t , and t e x t q u e r y f e e l l i k e a p l a u s i b l e r e a l - w o r l d s c e n a r i o ? - R e j e c t i f t h e g e n e r a t e d t r a n s c r i p t i s n o n s e n s i c a l g i v e n t h e v i s u a l c o n t e x t . **THE BYPASS TEST** * ** M i s s i n g M o d a l i t y : * * Can t h e q u e s t i o n be answered u s i n g t h e Text + Image / Video a l o n e ( i g n o r i n g Audio ) ? -> * R e s u l t must be NO. * * **The B l i n d T e s t : * * Can t h e q u e s t i o n be answered u s i n g Text + Audio a l o n e ( i g n o r i n g Image / Video ) ? -> * R e s u l t must be NO. * * **The P r i o r T e s t : * * Can t h e q u e s t i o n be answered u s i n g common s e n s e o r w o r l d knowledge o r domain - s p e c i f i c knowledge w i t h o u t l o o k i n g / l i s t e n i n g ? -> * R e s u l t must be NO. * * **The Ambiguity Check : * * I s t h e r e * e x a c t l y one * l o g i c a l answer ? ( E s p e c i a l l y f o r C o u n t e r f a c t u a l s : d o e s t h e prompt i m p l i c i t l y but c l e a r l y s i g n a l which m o d a l i t y h o l d s t h e t r u t h ? ) -> * R e s u l t must be YES . * * **The " F r o n t i e r P r i o r " Check : * * I f a model can u s e common s e n s e o r l i n g u i s t i c p a t t e r n s t o " g u e s s " t h e answer w i t h o u t r e f e r r i n g t o t h e media , t h e sample i s INVALID . * ** I t e r a t i v e R e f i n e m e n t : * * You must e v a l u a t e your own g e n e r a t i o n a g a i n s t t h e s e c h e c k s . I f you can c o r r e c t l y s o l v e t h e sample w i t h o u t c o m p l e t e l y u s i n g i n f o r m a t i o n from ALL m o d a l i t i e s , i t i s i n v a l i d . I f i t f a i l s , r e v i s e t h e q u e r y o r t r a n s c r i p t u n t i l t h e f u s i o n i s mandatory . * **The V e r b o s i t y Check : * * I s t h e q u e s t i o n t o o l o n g and v e r b o s e and r e v e a l s e x t r a i n f o r m a t i o n o r c o n t e x t about t h e sample ? Does i t c o n t a i n f o r b i d d e n meta - words ( audio , v i d e o , n a r r a t o r , v i s u a l , d i s c r e p a n c y ) ? -> * Answer t o both must be NO. * **PRIOR CONFIDENCE SCORE** You w i l l be p r o v i d e d w i t h t h e G e n e r a t i n g Model ' s s e l f - r a t e d c o n f i d e n c e s c o r e ( 1 t o 5 ) . - I f S c o r e i s 1 o r 2 : Run t h e 4 p i l l a r s n o r m a l l y , b e c a u s e we a l r e a d y know t h e sample i s not a v e r y good f i t . The g e n e r a t o r s t r u g g l e d t o f i t t h e t e m p l a t e t o t h i s media . Look c l o s e l y f o r f o r c e d l o g i c o r u n v e r i f i a b l e c l a i m s . - I f S c o r e i s 4 o r 5 : The g e n e r a t o r was h i g h l y c o n f i d e n t . Apply MAXIMUM SCRUTINY, and e n s u r e t h a t t h e sample p a s s e s a l l q u a l i t y c h e c k s . **OUTPUT FORMAT** You must o u t p u t a s t r i c t JSON o b j e c t . Do not i n c l u d e markdown f o r m a t t i n g b l o c k s . DO NOT f o r m a t t h e JSON o b j e c t w i t h \n o r any o t h e r f o r m a t t i n g c h a r a c t e r s . Simply o u t p u t t h e j s o n a s a s i n g l e s t r i n g . DO NOT o u t p u t any t e x t u a l c o n t e n t e x c e p t t h e JSON o b j e c t AFTER t h e </t h i n k > t a g . The JSON must s t r i c t l y f o l l o w t h i s schema : {" t e m p l a t e _ i d " : " [ t e m p l a t e _ i d ] " , " d e c i s i o n " : "ACCEPT" o r "REJECT" , " f a i l u r e _ p i l l a r " : " [ Name o f t h e f a i l e d p i l l a r , o r n u l l i f ACCEPT] " , " r a t i o n a l e " : " [ B r i e f e x p l a n a t i o n o f e x a c t l y why i t p a s s e d o r f a i l e d ] " , " g e n e r a t i o n _ c o n f i d e n c e _ s c o r e " : " [ g e n e r a t i o n _ c o n f i d e n c e _ s c o r e ] " , " d i f f i c u l t y _ s c o r e " : [ I n t e g e r 1 - 1 0 , o r - 1 . CRITICAL RULES : Use - 1 i f t h e media i s t o o b l u r r y , n o i s y , u n i n t e l l i g i b l e , o r ambiguous t o f a i r l y e v a l u a t e . For c l e a n media , u s e 1 - 1 0 b a s e d s t r i c t l y on t h e c o g n i t i v e / r e a s o n i n g c o m p l e x i t y r e q u i r e d . R e s e r v e 10 ONLY f o r p r i s t i n e , c r y s t a l - c l e a r s a m p l e s t h a t demand complex , edge - o f - c a p a b i l i t i e s c r o s s - modal r e a s o n i n g . ] }**SAMPLE TO AUDIT** ** G e n e r a t i o n C o n f i d e n c e S c o r e : * * {SCORE} / 5** G e n e r a t i o n L o g i c : * * {TEMPLATE_LOGIC} ** Sample I n f o r m a t i o n : * * {SAMPLE_DATA} E v a l u a t e t h i s sample a g a i n s t t h e 4 P i l l a r s . Output t h e s t r i c t JSON d e c i s i o n . LLM-as-a-Judge Prompt 

You a r e a s t r i c t m u l t i m o d a l benchmark e v a l u a t o r . You a r e g i v e n : - The f u l l benchmark sample - A l l a s s o c i a t e d media f i l e s - The u s e r q u e r y - The ground t r u t h answer - A model p r e d i c t i o n Your t a s k : Determine whether t h e p r e d i c t i o n i s s e m a n t i c a l l y e q u i v a l e n t t o t h e ground t r u t h answer i n CONTEXT o f t h e a l l t h e g i v e n media and t h e q u e r y . For example , i f t h e p r e d i c t e d answer u n i q u e l y p i c k s out t h e same c o n c e p t / e n t i t y a s t h e ground t r u t h answer i n c o n t e x t o f t h e media and q u e r y t h e n t h e y a r e s e m a n t i c a l l y e q u i v a l e n t . E v a l u a t i o n R u l e s : - N o r m a l i z e u n i t s and f o r m a t t i n g d i f f e r e n c e s - Allow e q u i v a l e n t wording - Allow i n s i g n i f i c a n t f o r m a t t i n g d i f f e r e n c e s - C o n s i d e r t h e a c t u a l q u e r y c a r e f u l l y - Be s t r i c t about s e m a n t i c c o r r e c t n e s s - R e j e c t h a l l u c i n a t e d o r p a r t i a l l y - c o r r e c t a n s w e r s Output ONLY: YES o r NO Do not o u t p u t a n y t h i n g e l s e . SAMPLE INFORMATION: {SAMPLE_DATA} QUERY: {QUERY} GROUND TRUTH: {GROUND_TRUTH} MODEL PREDICTION : {PREDICTION} E q u i v a l e n t ? J Hardware and API Usage 

All Gemini and Nano Banana Pro experiments were conducted through the Gemini API. All other com-putational experiments were ran on a mix of 4x A100 80GB GPUs and 2x RTX 5000 32GB GPUs. 

K AI Assistance Declaration 

AI (LLM) assistance was availed in the prepara-tion of this manuscript, particularly for editing and proofreading. The code implementation of some experiments was also facilitated by AI.